Linux Processes Basics

A process is a running instance of a program. When a program is executed,
the Linux operating system creates a process to manage its execution.

1. What Is a Process?

A process is a program that is currently running.

For example, when a user starts a text editor, Linux creates a process for
that application.

A process has resources associated with it, including memory and CPU time.
Linux keeps track of running processes so that they can be managed by the
operating system.


2. Process ID (PID)

Every running process is assigned a unique Process ID, commonly called a
PID.

The PID allows users and the operating system to identify a specific
process.

For example, if a process has PID 1234, commands can use 1234 to refer to
that particular process.


3. ps

The ps command displays information about currently running processes.

Example:

ps

This displays processes associated with the current terminal session.

A commonly used option is:

ps aux

This displays information about processes running on the system, including
processes belonging to other users.


4. top

The top command provides a real-time view of running processes.

It displays information such as CPU usage, memory usage, process IDs, and
process names.

Example:

top

Unlike a normal ps command, top continuously updates the displayed
information while it is running.


5. kill

The kill command sends a signal to a process.

It is commonly used to request that a process terminate.

Example:

kill 1234

This sends a termination signal to the process with PID 1234.

If a process does not respond to a normal termination request, a stronger
signal can be used:

kill -9 1234

The -9 option sends SIGKILL, which immediately terminates the process.
It should be used carefully because the process does not get an opportunity
to perform normal cleanup.


6. Foreground Processes

A foreground process runs while the terminal waits for the process to
finish.

For example:

python script.py

The terminal remains occupied by the command until the program finishes or
is stopped.


7. Background Processes

A background process can run without blocking the terminal.

A command can be started in the background by adding an ampersand (&).

Example:

python script.py &

The terminal can then be used for other commands while the program
continues running.


8. Process Management

Linux provides several commands for inspecting and managing processes.

Common commands include:

ps     - displays process information
top    - provides a real-time process view
kill   - sends a signal to a process

Together, these commands allow users to inspect running programs and
manage processes from the terminal.